# Assignment 1 - Annotated Bibliography
Noah Schulman - 
2,540 words

   1) Bhatt, B., & Joshi, J. P. (2013). A geospatial approach for assessing and modeling spatial accessibility of the primary health centers in the tribal talukas of the Vadodara district [Abstract]. *INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOMATICS AND GEOSCIENCES,* *3*(3).

Researchers in this article utilize geospatial data to assess the spatial pattern of healthcare facilities and help plan future healthcare infrastructure projects in tribal Talukas of the Vadodara district in India. As Amartya Sen frequently emphasizes in his definition of development, lacking basic medical treatment is a major source of unfreedom. Having access to basic health care is a constitutive freedom that allows for most other forms of freedom to develop. As Hans Rosling points out, developing countries that facilitate growth in healthcare are able to develop faster than developing countries who focus more on GDP growth. This article cites how increasing access to primary health care facilities (PHCs), are a widely recognized strategy for improving the overall well-being of a population according to many NGOs such as the World Health Organization and UNICEF. The researchers in this article emphasize the difficulty of analyzing this particular issue, as there are myriad factors that go into determining which areas have access to adequate healthcare facilities. Such factors include availability of quality roads, travel distance, travel speed, mode of transport, PHC population coverage, and topographic impediments such as bodies of water, forests, or rugged terrain. Since so many intricate factors go into determining whether particular areas have adequate access to healthcare facilities, it is necessary to use data compiling methods like GIS to integrate statistical and geographic data to allow for the visualization of spatial relationships.

This particular study focuses on PHC accessibility of 4 tribal Talukas in the Vadodara district of India. This area of India has some of the most rugged terrain and PHC access for the local tribal population has always been a difficult issue. To assess the level of accessibility for this underserved population, the researchers utilized a GIS that compiles road network information, topographic maps of settlement areas, satellite imagery, and various population datasets to visualize the problem. Other data techniques such as Nearest Neighborhood Analysis and Weighted Sum Analysis was also used to compile various sources of data to assess PHC accessibility for the native population. Using the results of these various data science methods, researchers were able to assign a score to different areas of the Vadodara district based on distance/travel factors and population relative to PHC locations. The results showed that out of the 33 PHCs in the Vadodara district, 8 of them had a service area of over 100 square kilometers and served a population of over 22,000. This means that these PHCs are overburdened and can not sufficiently provide for the local population of their respective areas. Based on this information, the researchers were able to come up with a plan to strategically place a few more PHCs to be able to adequately provide for the area's population. The researchers also identified that road connectivity was the most major factor that hindered access to PHCs, and that government road building projects need to occur before health care infrastructure can make an impact. With such changes, the tribal peoples of the Vadodara district will be able to focus on more freedoms than just access to basic medical needs, potentially promoting expansion of freedoms in other areas such as economic and social opportunities. 

   2) Dano, Umar Lawal, et al. “Transformative Urban Governance: Confronting Urbanization Challenges with Geospatial Technologies in Lagos, Nigeria.” *GeoJournal*, vol. 85, no. 4, 2019, pp. 1039–1056., doi:10.1007/s10708-019-10009-1.

This article examines Lagos, Nigeria, the largest and fastest growing city in terms of population in Nigeria. The authors go over the various problems Lagos is facing due to rapid population growth and urbanization, as well as how geospatial technologies can be used to alleviate these problems. The authors first detail the potential of this city: coastal location, growing population, and economic opportunity among other factors, but then go on to explain the many development problems Lagos is experiencing. The majority of the development problems Lagos is experiencing has to do with their rapid annual increase in population (5.7%). These problems include poor urban planning, congestion, rising poverty and crime rates, immense housing deficit and mass slums, lack of basic human services such as clean water and proper sanitation, insufficient garbage collection and disposal, environmental damage, and transportation issues. These myriad problems lead to many types of unfreedoms for the people of Lagos, including lack of basic health standards and economic unfreedoms. As Amartya Sen emphasizes in his theories of development, lack of such constitutive freedoms such as economic and health freedoms severely hinder a population's potential for development. The authors then go into detail on each of these aforementioned problems and what has been done to alleviate these issues. The overarching theme of Lagos' development problems is that their population growth is not met with adequate physical and socioeconomic investment. It is necessary for the Nigerian government to focus on sustainable urban development in order to increase the amount of freedoms available to the people of Lagos.

The authors then explore how these problems can potentially be alleviated with the increased use of geospatial technologies. The Nigerian government currently uses the Lagos Geographic Information System (LAGIS), but it has been used sparingly to help with aspects of urban management such as neighborhood and transportation planning. The major problem with LAGIS is the lack of accessibility, as only select officials have access to this technology. In recent years, integration of land parcel data, road network data, high resolution satellite imagery, elevation data, LiDAR, and bathymetry into the GIS database has increased the potential applications LAGIS can be used in. The authors detail how LAGIS as well as other geospatial data science technologies such as a Spatial Decision Support System (SDSS) can be used in various contexts to help with urbanization problems. Potential use cases include urban planning and management, slum upgrading, crime reduction, transport and traffic management, and waste management. Small integrations of such projects such as using data science methods to reduce crime in other developing areas of Nigeria have proven to be effective. Utilizing such data science techniques will bring Lagos into the 21st century, allowing for sustainable urban development where more freedoms can be enjoyed, leading to greater total development for the people of Lagos. 

   3) I., D., A., & T. (2011). Analysis of urban expansion and land use changes in Akure, Nigeria, using remote sensing and geographic information system (GIS) techniques. *Journal of Geography and Regional Planning,* *4*(9).

This article details how remote sensing data was analyzed to determine land use changes in Akure, Nigeria as a result of urbanization. The article first recounts how unplanned urbanization is a major problem in developing countries. A common trend among urbanizing areas in the developing world is poorly planned infrastructure projects, which often result in unforeseen consequences such as degradation of fertile agricultural lands or loss of other various natural resources. This often leads to problems in food security and overall health as these rapidly urbanized areas no longer have the means to support a rapidly growing population. This article details how unplanned urban development often leads to major flooding, air pollution, deforestation, soil erosion, and desertification. According to Amartya Sen’s definition of development, unfreedoms in one area, such as food security or safety, will lead to unfreedoms in other areas, such as a lack of ability to participate in economic and social opportunities. Sustainable development methods, such as strategic urban planning, ensures that problems such as natural resource scarcity or air pollution will not arise, allowing for other sources of unfreedoms to be focused on to promote future development. 

Researchers in this study use remote sensing data and GIS to analyze how Akure’s natural landscape has changed as urbanization has accelerated from 1986 to 2007. Data from remote sensing satellite images, population census data, and population projections and growth rate were all incorporated into a GIS environment to assess the problem. The researchers used quantitative analysis and a maximum likelihood classification technique to analyze the data. The researchers found that the city is becoming increasingly congested, and that rapid outward expansion has resulted in the depletion of cultivated land and natural vegetation. During this time built up land increased drastically by 28.36%, likely a result of newly discovered natural resources such as oil in the area. Despite such a drastic increase in built up lands and depletion of formerly cultivated lands, the amount of arable land actually increased considerably in Akure (30%), however it is not clear how much of this arable land is currently being used to sustain the local population. This rapid use of land has resulted in a 33.8% reduction in dense forests, potentially leading to problems in air quality and carbon management. The data was visually interpreted using Land Use Land Cover Modeling, allowing for changes in land use over time to be easily analyzed. The researchers conclude that sustainable development in the areas of urban planning, agricultural enhancement, and deforestation are needed, which will ultimately protect the freedoms of citizens in Akure, allowing for a developing environment. If such unfettered urbanization continues however, it is likely that food security and natural resource scarcity will become a threat to the freedoms and development for the people of Akure.

   

   4) Kiio, M. M., & Achola, O. P. (2015). Land Use Land Cover Changes and their Effects on Agricultural Land: A Case Study Kiambu County -Kenya [Abstract]. *Kabarak Journal of Research & Innovation,* *3*(1).

In this study, researchers analyze the changes in land use and land cover in Kiambu County, Kenya from 1984-2013 using geospatial data. Kiambu County has seen a rapid rise in urbanization due to increased economic opportunity and access to goods and services in its urban centers. Kiambu County’s meteoric rise in population demands more residential and commercial areas, leading to poorly planned building projects. Such residential and commercial building projects have led to a significant decrease in agricultural land, a concerning trend considering the county’s rapid rise in population. Food insecurity is a major hindrance to development according to Amartya Sen’s definition of development. Lacking access to food is a major source of unfreedom; the lack of constitutive freedoms relating to health severely hinders the ability for other freedoms, such as economic freedom, to flourish. Agricultural land is a very important resource in Kenya, with only 17% of fertile land receiving enough rainfall for rain fed agriculture. Kiambu County in particular is one of the most fertile areas in Kenya; the county’s economy heavily relies on agriculture to feed their population as well as maintain their economy, with many of their most popular crops being cash crops. Economic freedom is another important freedom emphasized by Amartya Sen; lack of opportunity to participate in markets severely cripples the ability of a population to make advances in other types of freedom. Agriculture is the backbone of developing countries who have fertile land that receives adequate rainfall, so informed urban planning is necessary to maintain the needs of the population in terms of food security and economic sustainability. 

The researchers in this study used GIS, remote sensing, and GPS tools to analyze the effects of land cover changes in Kiambu County from 1984-2013. Census population data, soil data, road data, topographic maps, multispectral satellite data, and GPS data were all merged into a GIS environment to analyze the data as a whole. Digital image analysis was used with supervised classification, categorizing land into 7 categories: agricultural land, forests, built-area/urban land, water body, wet land, grassland, and bare land/rock area. The results showed that from 1984-2013, built-area/urban land increased significantly from 1.9% to 33.5%. During the same time period agricultural land decreased from 39.7% to 15.8%. The researchers observed a near direct relationship between population increase and loss of agricultural land in Kiambu County, predicting that food insecurity will become a major problem by 2030 if no focus is made on sustainable urban planning. The researchers emphasize the importance of effective land use for sustainable development, citing how new residential and commercial building projects in Kiambu county are being done on fertile red volcanic soil. Informed urban planning is a key element to sustainable development; it will maintain cash crops as an essential component of Kiambu County’s economy, as well as sustain Kiambu County’s rapidly increasing population. Urbanization is not a bad thing for Kiambu County, it has the potential to expand the freedoms of millions of people, however without proper land management, food insecurity could create a major crisis for the people of Kiambu, significantly hampering expansion of freedoms and overall development. 

   5) Sorichetta, A., Bird, T. J., Ruktanonchai, N. W., zu Erbach-Schoenberg, E., Pezzulo, C., Tejedor, N., Waldock, I. C., Sadler, J. D., Garcia, A. J., Sedda, L., & Tatem, A. J. (2016). Mapping internal connectivity through human migration in malaria endemic countries. *Scientific Data*, *3*(1), 160066. 

This article outlines how researchers were able to map internal migration flows in every malaria endemic country in the world in order to prevent potential outbreaks. Today’s world is more connected than ever, and we are experiencing increased levels of migration due to ease of travel. This has many unforeseen consequences, such as the spread of deadly diseases like malaria. The authors detail how people can unknowingly spread malaria parasites, including anti-malarial resistant strains, to new areas. Many areas that don’t have a history of malaria outbreaks are unprepared for potential outbreaks, and when malaria outbreaks do occur, the local population is often ravaged by the disease. Lack of infrastructure to prevent outbreaks from pathogens such as malaria are a major source of unfreedom in developing countries. As Amartya Sen emphasizes in his theories on development, people who are subjected to one type of unfreedom, like having to deal with life-threatening diseases, are subjected to other types of unfreedom, like being unable to engage in economic and social opportunities, severely hampering development. If migration patterns are able to be modeled in malaria endemic countries, much can be done to predict where potential malaria outbreaks might occur, and preparation can be done to help such areas. Researchers in this article suggest that a wide variety of data can be used to map pathogen movement, such as air and sea travel data records, census migration data, travel history and displacement surveys, GPS tracking data, and satellite night time light data. The researchers also express the usefulness of mobile phone call detail records in mapping human movements, but cite the obstacles they are currently facing such as commercial restrictions and privacy regulations. Existing data sources, such as census migration data, are still very useful in mapping the spread of pathogens such as malaria. 

The researchers used census migration data from multiple different online databases to create an open access archive of internal human migration flows in every malaria endemic country from 2005-2010. They did this using a gravity-model based approach, in which push and pull factors along with internal census migration data were used to estimate the total number of people moving from place to place. Since migration factors vary from each unique location around the world, many different formulas and algorithms were used to determine which type of model worked best for certain areas based on the data available. As a result, they were able to map internal human migration flows between subnational administrative units for every malaria endemic country in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean. The researchers suggest that such models can be used to support a range of applications from planning interventions, to measuring progress and designing strategies for areas at risk of a malaria outbreak. Adequate healthcare is a primary precursor to development, and strategic implementation of healthcare facilities and projects using models such as the one used in this study goes a long way in promoting sustainable development in malaria endemic countries. Use of data science methods to visualize such large sums of data can be an incredibly useful tool to help combat long lasting and significant problems such as the spread of malaria. When developing countries no longer have to focus on life threatening diseases such as malaria, freedoms in other areas such as social and economic opportunity will promote development in all other aspects of life. 
