# Human Development & Data Science Insights - Convolutional Neural Networks

A recent trend in data science methodologies has been the use of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). CNNs are typically used for image recognition due to its unique ability to detect patterns across space. CNNs are most commonly applied in facial recognition technology, climate analysis, and personalized advertising. More recently it has been used to tackle other problems such as Natural Language Processing, but it is most commonly used to classify objects in a given picture. Just like traditional neural networks, CNNs are comprised of layers of neurons which receive an input, transform that input, and send the input to the next layer. CNNs are different from traditional neural networks in that they have convolutional layers. Each convolutional layer has a certain number of filters which allows the CNNs to detect patterns. The deeper into a CNN, the more complex the filters get. For example, in the initial layers of a CNN, filters identify simple patterns such as edges, shapes, and textures, but in deeper layers, filters detect elements like eyes, fur, or feathers and eventually detect whole objects like dogs, lizards, or humans. CNNs essentially simplify complex images into smaller parts, allowing for images to be more easily processed and understood.

Researchers at Penn State University have used CNNs to help farmers in Cambodia, Kenya, and Tanzania identify diseases in their cassava crops. Cassava feeds 600 million people worldwide and is highly susceptible to disease, destroying up to 40% of crop yield when present. To combat this, Penn State researchers developed an app called “Nuru,” where farmers can take pictures of their crops and have potential diseases be identified instantly thanks to the CNN used in the app. The CNN used in Nuru was trained using a database of 150,000 photographs of diseased plants in Google's machine learning environment, TensorFlow. Despite the complexity of CNNs, the CNN used in Nuru is able to work in low-spec smartphones without internet access. This is an extremely important tool for farmers in food-insecure developing countries who don’t have access to expensive equipment or internet connectivity. The CNN used in Nuru is also highly effective, being twice as accurate as their human crop advisor counterparts and able to identify the species and disease in 99% of high-quality images. This is an amazing advancement in technology for developing countries, helping to bolster food security and close the digital divide. Nuru is currently being trained to identify diseases in other crops such as rice and wheat, allowing farmers in developing countries around the world to prevent future famines. 

Convolutional Neural Networks are an incredibly complex and powerful tool that has proven to be effective in the private sector, and has been increasingly used to aid in development problems around the world. If more powerful tools such as Nuru are able to be used in the hands of developing countries, a wide array of development problems can be solved without the requirement of expensive equipment or internet access. The technology to solve such important problems already exists, however just like most data science technologies, the economic incentive in the use of CNNs keeps the majority of the technology’s focus on tasks like personalized advertising, instead of food security. 