# 11/15 Final Project Abstract

It is widely recognized among development experts that rapid urbanization in developing regions frequently leads to poorly planned land use. Such unregulated land use coincides with rapid levels of urban sprawl, often leading to the destruction of agricultural lands. This is especially relevant in Sub Saharan Africa, one of the least developed and fastest urbanizing regions in the world. Sub Saharan Africa has little arable land to begin with, so destruction of highly productive agricultural land near urban centers is exceptionally detrimental to the region's food supply. Such high levels of agricultural land loss combined with the region’s meteoric increases in population could lead to serious problems for the region’s food security. Food insecurity in the region could also be exacerbated by a crisis situation like a natural disaster or outbreak of war, potentially leading to mass scale famine. The purpose of my research is to conduct a descriptive inquiry investigating the causes and effects of rapid urbanization on food security in Sub Saharan Africa. It is important that this development process is adequately understood in order to prevent a crisis situation such as large scale famine.

Researchers investigating land use and land cover changes in Sub Saharan Africa have developed a common procedure to analyze this development process. Using multi-temporal geospatial imagery from Landsat sensors, researchers are able to use Maximum Likelihood supervised classification to classify which regions of urbanized areas correspond with certain land classes. The classified imagery is then uploaded to a geographic information system where land use land cover maps are curated. Land use land cover maps allow researchers to analyze changes in different land class areas over time. Analysis of land use land cover maps for various urbanizing regions in Sub Saharan Africa show a significant loss of agricultural lands and a drastic increase in urbanized land over the same time period. This trend allows us to infer that food supply is decreasing in Sub Saharan Africa due to loss of agricultural lands, while food demand is increasing due to rapid urbanization and population increase. If such trends continue, the region will continue to have uncertainty relating to food security, and if changes aren’t made, there is a substantial possibility of large scale famine. While land use and land cover analysis of urban regions in Sub Saharan Africa give insight into ongoing food security trends, further research needs to be done in order to quantify the reduction in food supply and increase in food demand.