# 11/5 - In Class Essay

In the modern world, we now have access to unprecedented amounts of data. As Chris Anderson mentions in his article, “End of Theory,” researchers used to only have access to mere kilobytes of data, while we now have access to petabytes of information. Data on this scale allows us to observe the intricacies of very large scale processes using modern data science methods. Rob Kitchen, in his research article on big data, details how such large amounts of data can now be analyzed using data science methods such as machine learning, which allow for complex patterns and relationships that are ordinarily difficult to observe to be recognized. Perhaps the most important processes researchers should be focused on are development processes. With a proper understanding of development processes, developing countries could be able to expand the freedoms of their citizens to promote a better quality of life, coinciding with Amartya Sen’s definition of development. 

Traditionally however, such development processes are often viewed too linearly. In his 2012 Kapuscinski lecture, Owen Barder mentions previous attempts to describe development processes such as the Harrod-Domar Economic Growth Model and Neoclassical Economic Growth Model, but these models were not able to properly capture the complex nature of economic systems. Barder instead suggests that development processes such as economic growth should be viewed as a complex adaptive system. As the name suggests, complex adaptive systems are very complex and extremely difficult to describe and model. With the emergence of modern data science methods, such as machine learning, as well as access to extensive amounts of data, properties and patterns common among complex adaptive systems can be identified. 

Such common properties among complex adaptive systems are identified in Geoff West’s book, “Scale.” West identifies how data science can be used to identify scaling relationships in complex processes, such as the evolution of cities. For example, West identifies how infrastructural properties of cities scale sublinearly, meaning the bigger the city, the more efficient the city becomes in regards to infrastructure needs. An example of this is how as cities grow, less infrastructure such as gas stations, roads, and power lines are needed on a per capita basis. West also found that socioeconomic properties of cities scale superlinearly, meaning as a city grows, socioeconomic qualities, such as average wages, crime, and number of patents increase on a per capita basis. West also identifies that these scaling relationships are not exclusive to the evolution of cities; they are found in many other complex adaptive systems, such as those found in biology. West compares scaling relationships from biology and city development to suggest that complex adaptive systems, although difficult to thoroughly model, have similar scaling properties that can be used to develop a better understanding of how such systems evolve. The recognition of such scaling relationships was only possible due to the presence of large amounts of data. West goes on to say how the advent of big data, such as the exabytes of data collected by CERN, and new data science methods like machine learning, allows researchers to further identify where such scaling relationships exist and if there are in fact laws that define complex adaptive systems. 

Data science methods are already being used to help gain insight into development processes. In my own research, I observed how researchers use big data and data science methods such as Maximum Likelihood classification to identify how agricultural land in Sub Saharan Africa is being replaced by urbanized land. Before the advent of modern data science methods, this process would have to be observed using human administered surveys. Joshua Blumenstock also highlights how data science methods such as machine learning are currently being used in conjunction with large datasets such as CDR and migration data to analyze development processes. Such processes would also traditionally be hard to analyze before the emergence of modern data science methods; using traditional human-centered methods, it is unlikely that many of the patterns observed with machine learning would be identified. This is why the emergence of big data and machine learning is critical in human development. Such tools are critical in alleviating many of the unfreedoms Amartya Sen describes, and in time big data has the potential to expand the freedoms of countless people in undeveloped areas of the world. One’s social and economic freedom is highly dependent on the complex adaptive systems of the area they live. If such large scale complex adaptive systems such as the ones described by West and Barder are to be synthesized into a set of universal laws, big data and modern data science technologies would have to be used to identify such complicated relationships.

Researchers should be cautious, however, when using big data to identify development processes. As Rob Kitchen and Geoff West emphasize, it should be used in conjunction with the traditional scientific method. People like Chris Anderson will argue that with machine learning and the amount of data available, correlation in the data is enough to draw conclusions, however there are flaws to this line of thinking. Kitchen and West highlight how relying on correlation could result in critical errors when analyzing large scale processes, and it should not be assumed that correlation equals causation. Big data is being used to analyze very important development processes, so it should be ensured that accurate conclusions are reached. It is also important that big data is not used for malicious purposes. Today in China, the government uses data from mass surveillance to enforce an Orwellian social credit system. They also utilize machine learning with biometric data to maintain strict authoritarian rule. There should be strict guidelines in the use of big data to ensure that it is used for good and not for nefarious purposes. 

Big data as a tool, when used in conjunction with the scientific method, is the next step of scientific discovery. As Rob Kitchen states “revolutions in science have often been preceded by revolutions in measurement;” big data and data science will allow the pace and ease of scientific discovery to drastically increase. It can allow us to understand the science of complex adaptive systems of development processes, allowing for a better understanding of how to expand the freedoms of people all over the world. 


