# 10/22 - Central Research Question - Type of Inquiry
My central research question is: How do current trends in urbanization affect food security in Sub Saharan Africa? This involves analyzing the process of urbanization in Sub Saharan Africa and all of its subcomponents as well as investigating the results of the process of urbanization; specifically quantifying its impact on food security. This aligns perfectly with a descriptive inquiry as it seeks to identify what is happening through analyzing the causes and effects of my human development problem. Another type of inquiry this central research question could fall into is exploratory as I am seeking to understand the process of urbanization and how it has developed. This is more what I was answering when I was doing my literature review and it allowed me to develop my central research question, which is typical of an exploratory inquiry. 

My central research question can be divided into two subtopics: What factors influence urbanization in Sub Saharan Africa? And: To what extent is food security being strained in Sub Saharan Africa? The former question helps to answer the “cause” part of my explanatory inquiry as it focuses on the specific factors that are related to urbanization. The latter question seeks to answer the “effect” of urbanization, which is the extent that food security is strained in Sub Saharan Africa. This will involve quantifying how much food supply and demand has changed with the expanding population. 
