# Anderson Argument

In today’s world, we have access to an unprecedented amount of data. With search engines like Google, various forms of social media, consumer data, and satellite data, data scientists now have access to a wealth of data concerning a variety of topics about the world. As Chris Anderson emphasizes, we now have access to petabytes of information, allowing for the exhaustive analysis of various aspects of the real world. With petabytes of data available, there is longer a use for scientific models to understand reality, as we can now use machine learning algorithms to identify what is present in the vast amounts of data available, allowing us to let data speak for itself. 

As Chris Anderson points out, this isn’t even a new development. Google has been using this approach for years now, and clearly they have been having success. Opponents of ditching traditional scientific theory commonly say that you can’t solely rely on data because it assumes that correlation is also causation. While there is some truth to this, over the years Google has proven that with enough data, correlation is enough. Google is able to translate languages instantly without the aid of human language experts, and J. Craig Venter was able to sequence the DNA of entire ecosystems and even the air to discover proof of new species without even knowing anything about said species. With enough data, it seems like data scientists have the ability to take a leap of faith and see correlation as objective truth, because more times than not, it is pointing to reality. 

While the scientific method has served humanity well for the past few hundred years, it is time to move into a new era of scientific discovery. The scientific method is a long and drawn out process, with vast amounts of data and the ability to analyze it with machine learning, data scientists are able to learn the objective truths about reality in a much faster manner. One advantage of the scientific method is that it allows us to understand the “why” of phenomena in the world, but that isn’t really necessary to help humanity progress into the next era of scientific discovery. 

# Kitchen Argument

We are currently seeing a major shift in the area of scientific discovery. With vast amounts of data currently available to us and new data analysis technologies like machine learning algorithms, scientists now have extremely powerful tools to help discover scientific phenomena. While such developments have the potential to rapidly advance scientific discovery in many fields, it would be naive to say that using purely data analysis can replace the traditional scientific method. 

There are many flaws to this way of thinking. Proponents of ditching the scientific method for exhaustive data analysis frequently highlight how data analysis removes the possibility for human bias, but this is far from the truth. The actual algorithms used by data scientists were created by humans, and even uses the scientific method to create an effective one. The data being analyzed was also collected by humans, so algorithms are combing through a perception of reality with a human spin on it. This will of course put an element of human bias into the data analysis as the data and the tools to analyze it are heavily impacted by human bias. Moreover, the dream of exhaustive data analysis is far from reality, as there is always the potential for important data to be excluded from data sets, leading to data scientists accepting a correlation in data without important factors being accounted for. While data analysis has the potential to be like this in the future, we simply to dot have access to this godly amount of information, nor do we have the tools to be able to objectively say what is reality and what is not purely based on data. 

Due to these flaws in purely relying on data analysis rather than the traditional scientific method, it is best to stick to using the scientific method as it  has served humanity and scientific development well over the last few hundred years. With this said, it would be a waste to ignore the wealth of data and amazing data analysis tools currently available to us, but it should be used as a tool in the scientific method. This will speed up the formerly slow approach of the scientific method while ensuring that important factors are accounted for.


