# Assignment 2 - Literature Review

## **Urbanization and Food Security: How Irresponsible Land Use in Sub Saharan Africa Leads to Potential Famine**

Noah Schulman - 3158 words

Developing countries around the world are currently experiencing rapid levels of urbanization, with nearly all of the fastest growing cities in the world being located in developing countries (United Nations, 2018). While the development of urban hubs is important to stimulate the economy of developing countries, such rapid urbanization often results in unforeseen consequences that hamper development, especially if left unchecked. It is widely acknowledged that urbanization in developing countries often leads to poorly planned land use (Hatab et al., 2019). There are many consequences of unregulated land use, but one of the most significant consequences is the loss of agricultural lands. This is particularly relevant in the context of rapid urbanization, as a larger food supply is required to support a rapidly growing population. Poorly planned commercial and residential building projects often replace agricultural land or are built on top of fertile soil. This loss of agricultural land combined with a rapidly growing population puts a major strain on a city’s food security, and would be compounded if a natural disaster or humanitarian crisis were to occur, making large scale famine a possible outcome.

This trend is evident in Sub Saharan Africa, where each of the 15 fastest growing cities in the world are located (United Nations, 2018). Many of these countries have a finite amount of arable land, so it is particularly important to conserve such land in order to support their rapidly growing population (Kiio & Achola, 2018). Urban hubs are often located near the most productive agricultural land in their respective countries as their growth was precipitated due to the highly fertile soil. With rapid urbanization occurring in Sub Saharan Africa, the most productive agricultural lands are currently being converted into urbanized land, putting a significant strain on food security given the meteoric rates of population growth in urban centers. With land use regulations seldom enforced in Sub Saharan Africa, developers will continue to build on highly productive arable land in order to keep up with the demands of the rising population. If this trend continues, many urban hubs in Sub Saharan Africa will be highly susceptible to famine. 

This trend has been analyzed in Sub Saharan Africa using various geospatial data science methodologies. Researchers commonly use multi-temporal geospatial imagery from Landsat sensors to analyze land use and land cover changes. After pre-processing, imagery from Landsat sensors is classified using Maximum Likelihood classification and is then used to create land use land cover maps using a GIS software. Researchers use land use land cover maps to quantify the change in land use over various timeframes.

### Literature Review

#### Urbanization

Britannica (2020) defines urbanization as “the process by which large numbers of people become permanently concentrated in relatively small areas, forming cities.” According to the Council on Foreign Relations (2018), Sub Saharan Africa is urbanizing at the fastest rate in the world. This can be a good thing for developing countries such as those in Sub Saharan Africa; urbanization allows for the development of a country’s economy and gives many people the means to lift themselves out of poverty. The main driver of urbanization in Sub Saharan Africa is rural to urban migration as urban areas provide many economic and social opportunities (Annobea & Simatele, 2018). 

Abass, Adanu, and Agyemang (2018) in their study of the Kumasi Metropolis in Ghana, observed that over 51% of Ghanaians now live in urban centers, a stark contrast to the 70% of Ghanaians who lived in rural areas in 1957. The authors also observed a 5.4% population growth rate in Kumasi alone. The authors attribute such high levels of urbanization to the area's economic potential. Kumasi is the Ashanti regional capital and is located near a wealth of natural resources. These are major pull factors for the poorer populations in the region’s periphery, where economic opportunity is far more sparse. This is evident in the fact that 63% of the Kumasi population are migrants from other parts of the country. 

This trend is also echoed in Forkour and Cofie’s (2009) investigation of Freetown, Sierra Leone. The authors detail how Sierra Leone has been experiencing an urbanization boom, with 44% of the population expected to live in urban areas in 2010, a 38.1% change since 1963. 15% of the people living in urban areas reside in Freetown, with the vast majority of residents being migrants from other parts of the country. Forkour and Cofie also attribute the rise in migration to economic opportunity. Freetown is the capital of Sierra Leone and is in close proximity to a variety of natural resources, offering various forms of economic opportunity to the poorer populations in the country’s rural areas. The authors also detail how there was a mass rural to urban migration during the country’s decade long civil war which forced large swaths of the rural population to seek opportunity elsewhere. 

Mpofu, Darkoh, and Gwebu (2018) also recognize the theme of migration among rapidly urbanizing areas of Botswana. The authors’ area of study, Gabane Village, Botswana, experienced a 7.8% population growth rate between 1991 and 2011. This high growth rate is also associated with high levels of migration due to economic opportunity. The authors describe a lack of economic opportunity in rural Botswana leading to mass migration to urban areas with increased economic opportunity. Gabane Village in particular is located near Botswana’s capital, Gaborone, a lively economic hub, and is located near important natural resources which support the infrastructural endeavors of Gaborone. The aforementioned factors are highly attractive for Gabane Village’s prospects as an economic hub, with land speculators and private and public investors competing to buy up land in the area. 

Annobea and Simatele (2018) have also observed a trend of rural to urban migration in Johannesburg, South Africa. The authors cite how 62% of South Africa’s population live in urban areas, making it the fourth most urbanized country in Africa. Annobea and Simatele also credit such large levels of urbanization to migration stimulated by economic opportunity. The article cites the country’s history of Apartheid, which prompted people from rural fringes as well as surrounding countries to seek urbanized areas as they fostered a stable economy and better living conditions. 

#### Urban Sprawl

Although increased urbanization in developing countries has the potential to expand economies, there are many unforeseen negative consequences, such as urban sprawl. Britannica (2020) describes urban sprawl as “the rapid expansion of the geographic extent of cities and towns.” Such rapid expansion of urban land is pursued without regard for essential natural resources, flood prevention, public health, and availability of agricultural land. The United Nations’ (2020) Sustainable Development Goal 11 is to “make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.” This includes the need for governments in developing countries to enforce sustainable land use regulations to ensure sustainable development in urban centers, a goal rarely met by governments in Sub Saharan Africa.

As mentioned earlier, Abass, Adanu, and Agyemang (2018) observed high levels of urbanization in the Kumasi Metropolis in Ghana. Naturally, such high levels of population growth in this urban area have led to urban sprawl. This article introduces the term “housing deficits,” which is when there is not enough housing to support current population levels. The authors also observed the increasing cost of land in urban centers as well as the reduction of land price moving away from the city. The high demand for land due to a housing deficit coupled with low land costs in the urban fringe has led to a 8.6% housing growth rate between 1984 and 2000 in Kumasi. Expansion of urban land due to both residential and commercial building projects in Kumasi has led to a 54.6% increase in urban land from 1986 to 2016 according to the study’s land use land cover maps. Such significant levels of urban sprawl are often due to a lack of land use regulations and enforcement by local governments, which is evident in Kumasi according to the article. In fact, the local government even encourages urban sprawl, citing how urban land is more economically rewarding than rural and peri-urban land. 

A similar trend is observed in Lasisi et al.’s (2017) research on land use and land cover changes in Osun State, Nigeria. The article details massive population growth in Osun State, leading to a significant need for residential building projects. Land developers in the area also place higher value on urban land as it provides a higher return on investment than peri-urban and rural land uses such as agriculture. There are also few land use regulations in place in Osun State to prevent poorly planned and unsustainable building projects. These factors combined with high land costs in city centers and low land costs in the surrounding peri-urban and rural areas have resulted in considerable urban sprawl. Land use land cover maps curated by the authors reveal a 13% increase in urban land between 1986 and 2014. Without proper land use regulations enforced, urban sprawl is expected to increase as Nigeria has one of the highest urbanization rates in the world. 

Gyasi et al. (2014) in their study on urbanization in Tamale, Ghana recount a similar trend of urban sprawl. Just like other cities in Sub Saharan Africa, Tamale has a high population growth rate, with an annual growth rate of 3.3% from 1984 to 2000. As population increased in Tamale, the researchers observed similar rates of expansion in housing, schools, markets, and roads due to increased demand. This mass influx of people has expanded the urban areas of Tamale from 1 square km in 1945 to 900 square km in 2014. 

#### **Land Use Changes - Agricultural to Urban**

As a result of the extraordinary levels of urban sprawl in urban areas of Sub Saharan Africa, there has been a significant decline in agricultural land area. Considering the mass levels of population growth in urbanized areas of Sub Saharan Africa, reduction in agricultural land puts a major strain on food security. There is also a limited amount of arable land in Sub Saharan Africa, and cities are often located where they are due to fertile soils in the surrounding area (Kiio & Achola, 2015). With current rates of urban sprawl in Sub Saharan cities, the already scarce arable land is being covered up by residential and commercial building projects. The United Nations (2020) Sustainable Development Goal 2 is to “end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture.” Current population growth and land use trends in Sub Saharan Africa only moves the region farther from achieving SDG 2. It seems likely that issues with food security will only increase over the coming years if proper land use regulations are not implemented. 

Research on loss of agricultural land in Sub Saharan Africa often follows the same procedure to analyze land use and land cover changes. Annobea and Simatele (2018) utilize multi-temporal geospatial data to curate land use land cover maps to analyze replacement of agricultural land with urban land in Johannesburg, South Africa. The researchers first acquired geospatial land cover imagery from various landsat satellites (Landsat 5 TM, Landsat 7 ETM+, and Landsat 8 OLI) over multiple years (1989, 1999, 2006 and 2016) from the United States Geological Survey. Various imaging preprocessing procedures were then done on the images including geometric and radiometric correction using a FLAASH module in the Environment for Visualizing Images (ENVI) software to eliminate atmospheric distortions. The corrected images were subset into a shapefile of Johannesburg from the South African National Geo-spatial Information database. After preprocessing, the images were then classified into different land use categories using Maximum Likelihood supervised classification. Maximum Likelihood supervised classification is often used in these types of investigations due its user friendly nature and ability to be manipulated (Abass, Adanu & Agyemang, 2018). Maximum Likelihood supervised classification first requires the researchers to manually classify a “training set” of images to train the classification algorithm. Manual classification is done by identifying certain pixels/areas of the training set that correspond with certain types of land. After the training images have been manually classified, the Maximum Likelihood algorithm uses the information from the training sets to classify the rest of the images. In Maximum Likelihood classification, each pixel is assigned to the land use class that it has the highest probability of being. In this case, the researchers classified land into built up/urbanized areas, water bodies, and vegetation/agricultural land. After Maximum Likelihood classification, the researchers uploaded the data to ArcGIS, a geographic information system, to create land use land cover maps. The researchers were then able to analyze how urbanized land has replaced agricultural land in Johannesburg from 1989 to 2016. During that time frame, urbanized land increased by 27% while agricultural land decreased by 56.98%. Annobea and Simatele attribute this drastic replacement of agricultural land to land developers valuing more economically productive land such as commercial and residential land rather than economically unproductive land, such as, agricultural land. 

Abass, Adanu, and Agyemang (2018) used a similar procedure to analyze loss of agricultural land in the Kumasi Metropolis in Ghana. The authors collected geospatial land cover imagery from the same sensors as Annobea and Simatele (2018) for the years 1984, 2004, and 2016. The images were then geometrically and radiometrically corrected to eliminate atmospheric distortions and then subset into the shapefile of the Kumasi Metropolis using ArcGIS. The researchers then classified land as urbanized land, water bodies, vegetation/agricultural land using Maximum Likelihood supervised classification. The classified images were then uploaded to ArcGIS where land use land cover maps were created. Analysis of these maps shows that from 1986 to 2016, urbanized land increased by 54.6% while agricultural land decreased by 16%. The authors state how the replacement of agricultural land with urbanized land is due to the local government encouraging development of more economically rewarding land and the lack of land use regulations. 

The same process was used by Lasisi et al. (2017) to observe replacement of agricultural land with urbanized land in Osun State, Nigeria. The researchers used imagery from the same landsat sensors as the aforementioned studies for 1996, 2006, and 2014. Similarly, the same radiometric and geometric image preprocessing techniques as the previous studies were used and the images were classified into settlements, vegetation, water bodies, and exposed surfaces using Maximum Likelihood supervised classification. The resulting data was uploaded to ArcGIS where land use land cover maps were produced. The maps showed that settlements have increased from 6.60865% in 1986 to 20.11178% in 2014, while vegetation has been decreasing from 62.69045% to as low as 54.02527% in the same time frame. The article emphasizes the need for housing due to the area's significant housing deficit. The article also notes the lack of regulation on the behalf of the Osun State government to protect agricultural lands, with a large portion of farmers losing their livelihoods to commercial and residential developers. 

A similar trend was observed in Kiio and Achola’s (2015) study of Kiambu County, Kenya. The authors utilized imagery from the same landsat sensors as the previous studies and performed Maximum Likelihood classification to classify the images into agricultural land, forests, built-area/urban land, water bodies, wet land, grassland, and bare land/rock area. The classified images as well as census population data, soil data, and topographic data were uploaded to ArcGIS where land used land cover maps were created. Notably, the researchers observed a near direct relationship between population increase and loss of agricultural land, with the results showing that from 1984-2013, built-area/urban land increased significantly from 1.9% to 33.5% while agricultural land decreased from 39.7% to 15.8%. The article emphasizes how Kiambu County has some of the most fertile land in the world and new urban building projects are covering very agriculturally productive red volcanic soil. Kiio and Achola find this especially troubling for Kenya as a whole as Kiambu County represents a considerable chunk of the meager 17% of fertile land in Kenya suitable rainfall for rain fed agriculture.

#### Conclusion/Reflection

There seems to be a glaring trend among the rapidly urbanizing areas of Sub Saharan Africa. Emerging economic opportunity leads to mass migration, and urban developers can’t keep up with the demand for residential and commercial land development. This leads to substantial urban sprawl due to insufficient land use regulations, resulting in significant loss of agricultural land in the urban periphery. Modern data science methods such as Maximum Likelihood supervised classification coupled with multi-temporal geospatial data from Landsat sensors allow researchers to quantify and analyze how this trend has been affecting the region. 

Rapid population increase in urban centers of Sub Saharan Africa coupled with substantial loss of agricultural land calls for serious concern surrounding food security in the region. Given a crisis like a natural disaster or outbreak of war, many of these rapidly urbanizing areas in Sub Saharan Africa could be facing mass scale famine. It is important that aid organizations continue to work towards the UN’s SDG2 and SDG11 to help prevent famine from occurring. 

Many of the aforementioned articles propose several mitigating policy changes for the government of their respective research area. Most researchers such as Abass, Adanu, and Agyemang (2018) as well as Mpofu, Darkoh, and Gwebu (2018) call for new regulations surrounding land use practices such as protection of agricultural lands and limits on industrial activities like mining, however many of these researchers fail to realize how current trends are likely the result of a complex adaptive system. As Owen Barder (2012) emphasizes in his lecture on “The Implications of Complexity for Development,” one-dimensional policy recommendations for development problems rarely work. Barder explains how the traditional view of development processes are too linear, and ongoing processes in the developing world are usually the result of a complex adaptive system. In Kiio and Achola’s (2015) study for example, their research area of Kiambu County, Kenya has very different problems and circumstances than other urbanizing areas in Sub Saharan Africa. Kiambu county is unique in that they make up a large portion of Kenya’s land suitable for rain fed agriculture as well as their supply of agriculturally productive red volcanic soil. Kiambu also has different burgeoning economic opportunities than the other research areas and the region will continue to evolve based on its unique circumstances.

We are able to better understand the intricacies of these complex adaptive systems with modern data science methods. New data science methods like machine learning allows researchers to identify complex trends that are harder to identify with traditional data analysis methods. We now have access to an unprecedented amount of data, and machine learning algorithms can identify patterns to relate many different types of data together to help researchers identify the intricacies and relationships of complex adaptive systems. New data science methods allow researchers to analyze human development trends in ways that have never been possible before, allowing for better understanding of how the complex system of development works. 

#### Gap in the Literature

While the aforementioned articles are able to quantify the loss of agricultural land as areas urbanize, there seems to be a gap in the literature to quantify how food demand and food supply are changing in the region. The supply of food is evidently decreasing given the loss of agricultural land, but none of the aforementioned sources were able to identify the rate of food production in relation to the loss of agricultural land. The demand for food is also clearly increasing given the meteoric rise in population, but the aforementioned articles did not quantify how the demand for food is changing with the expanding population. More research needs to be done to quantify how much food security is being strained as a result of rapid urbanization in Sub Saharan Africa. 

#### Central Research Question

How do current trends in urbanization affect food security in Sub Saharan Africa?

#### References 

Abass, K., Adanu, S. K., & Agyemang, S. (2018). Peri-urbanisation and loss of arable land in Kumasi Metropolis in three decades: Evidence from remote sensing image analysis. *Land Use Policy,* *72*, 470-479. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.01.013

Annobea, E. M., & Simatele, D. (2018). Perspectives of the impact of urbanisation on urban agriculture landuse in Johannesburg, South Africa. *University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg,* 1-74.

Barder, O. (2012, August 15). The Implications of Complexity for Development - Owen Barder. Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.cgdev.org/media/implications-complexity-development-owen-barder

Campbell, J. (2018, September 12). Africa is the Fastest Urbanizing Place on the Planet. Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.cfr.org/blog/africa-fastest-urbanizing-place-planet

Cities – United Nations Sustainable Development. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/cities/

Duignan, B., Lotha, G., Rodriguez, E., & Augustyn, A. (1998, July 20). Urbanization. Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.britannica.com/topic/urbanization

Forkuor, G., & Cofie, O. (2011). Dynamics of land-use and land-cover change in Freetown, Sierra Leone and its effects on urban and peri-urban agriculture – a remote sensing approach. *International Journal of Remote Sensing,* *32*(4), 1017-1037. doi:10.1080/01431160903505302

Goal 2: Zero Hunger – United Nations Sustainable Development. (n.d.). Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/hunger/

Gyasi, E. A., Kranjac-Berisavljevic, G., Fosu, M., Mensah, A. M., Yiran, G., & Fuseini, I. (2014). Managing Threats and Opportunities of Urbanisation for Urban and Peri-urban Agriculture in Tamale, Ghana. *Water Science and Technology Library The Security of Water, Food, Energy and Liveability of Cities,* 87-97. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-8878-6_7

Hatab, A. A., Cavinato, M. E., Lindemer, A., & Lagerkvist, C. (2019). Urban sprawl, food security and agricultural systems in developing countries: A systematic review of the literature. *Cities,* *94*, 129-142. doi:10.1016/j.cities.2019.06.001

Kiio, M. M., & Achola, O. P. (2015). Land Use Land Cover Changes and their Effects on Agricultural Land: A Case Study of Kiambu County - Kenya. *Kabarak Journal of Research & Innovation,* *3*(1), 1-13.

Lasisi, M., Popoola, A., Adediji, A., Adedeji, O., & Babalola, K. (n.d.). City Expansion and Agricultural Land Loss within the Peri-Urban Area of Osun State, Nigeria. *Ghana Journal of Geography,* *9*(3), 132-163.

Mpofu, G., Darkoh, M. K., & Gwebu, T. (2017). Peri-urbanization landuse dynamics: An analysis of evolving patterns and their impacts on Gabane Village, Botswana. *GeoJournal,* *83*(4), 725-741. doi:10.1007/s10708-017-9798-3

Rafferty, J. P., Chopra, S., & Petruzzello, M. (2009, September 1). Urban sprawl. Retrieved October 19, 2020, from https://www.britannica.com/topic/urban-sprawl

The World’s Cities in 2018. (2018). *United Nations,* 1-32.



