# 8/28 - Response to Hans Rosling's "The best stats you've ever seen" Ted Talk

One of the biggest problems with learning statistics is how boring all the numbers and graphs look. In high school I absolutely hated statistics because it dealt with a lot of boring numbers and uninteresting subject matters. The way Hans Rosling presents his data in this presentation, however, would make learning statistics so much more enjoyable for the average student. Towards the end of his speech, Rosling emphasizes how important it is to visualize data for people rather than just present the numbers in data tables. The way Rosling presented the data was very visually appealing and even enjoyable to see unfold, something I never would have said about my high school statistics class. Presenting data in a visually appealing way combined with increased access to large databases from NGOs like the UN is crucial to spreading awareness to the issues our world is facing and is a major factor in promoting future development. Presenting the data in a visually appealing way also allowed for comprehension of the data to be much easier. When Rosling presented the graph visualizing income global income inequality, I was shocked. I previously understood that the richest portion of the population owned vast amounts of wealth but Rosling’s graph really put things into perspective for me and I now have a far better understanding of the problem.

The way Rosling presents his information also allows for people to see problems on vastly different scales. He was able to show a GDP per capita/child survival rate graph first as a collection of a few global regions, but then was able to further break those regions down into smaller and smaller regions to allow the intricacies of data to be understood as well as the big picture. This allows people to better understand the minutiae of global problems, such as how certain parts of underdeveloped regions, like in Africa, are much more developed than other parts. Rosling was also able to frequently change the statistical variables he was visualizing, like population, GDP, and child survival rate among others, and how these variables change over time, allowing for even more levels of depth to be considered. Large databases combined with data visualization software is obviously an incredibly important tool for development organizations to use to assess the overall status of the world’s problems, as well as the intricacies of development on regional levels. 

It was also interesting to see how GDP is not necessarily the most important factor to consider when looking at developing countries. Through the use of his data visualizations, Rosling was able to convey how the overall health of a country’s population allows for development to happen. He was able to compare how Uganda, Brazil, and South Korea developed over time rate and how South Korea was able to develop much faster than Uganda and Brazil due to its higher initial child survival rate, despite having a lower initial GDP than Brazil. He was also able to show how this trend is not always the case, and there are outliers. He showed how the UAE first started out with an extremely high GDP and then was able to use that wealth develop the infrastructure necessary to increase their child survival rate.

 
