# 10/27 - Theoretical Framework Question

## What are the concepts, definitions and relevant scholarly literature that serve as the basis for the existing theory that is used for your particular study (these may not be sources you have selected, but are instead found in the references of the sources you have chosen).  Are you able to identify theories that your sources use as the basis to explain the meaning, nature, and challenges associated with the phenomenon you are investigating?  How does your identified theory or theoretical framework serve to explain that phenomenon and how are you able to use that knowledge to better understand the process and investigate it in a more informed and effective manner? 

The overarching theory being tested in my area of study is that developing countries will experience problems with food security when they experience rapid levels of urbanization (Hatab et al., 2019). With the development of modern data science methodologies to examine the effects of urbanization on food security, specifically availability of agricultural lands, this theory has become more common when assessing effects of urbanization in developing regions. In their literature review of urban sprawl and its effects on agricultural systems in developing countries, Hatab et al. (2019) claim that it has become widely acknowledged that in developing regions, increase in urban sprawl leads to a reduction in agricultural land and soil degradation. This literature review cites Sonnino’s (2016) examination of urban food strategies. In his article, Sonnino describes how across many research ventures, a common trend examined among developing regions is that urbanization and urban sprawl will lead to degradation of soil and loss of land dedicated to food production. Sonnino adds that the literature in this area is sparse at this moment in time, but with ongoing research into this development process, as highlighted in my literature review, this trend is becoming more and more apparent. The ongoing research that has helped make this trend more widely recognized takes advantage of modern data science methods such as Maximum Likelihood classification and land use land cover maps. The advent of these methods has allowed for this development trend to be analyzed much more efficiently and at a much larger scale. I found that in my literature review that many of these research articles have been published within the last 5 years, so it is likely that this trend will develop into a much stronger theory of urbanization and food security as a whole.

Some important definitions that support this theory are “urban sprawl” and “peri-urbanization.” Many scholarly articles that support the theory that urbanization will lead to food insecurity in developing regions highlight the process of urban sprawl. Urban sprawl is commonly defined as the rapid expansion of the geographic extent of a city. This definition has been used in many research articles as a basis to explain the origin of ongoing food insecurity trends in developing countries such as in Abass, Adanu, and Agyemang’s (2018) examination of land use changes in the Kumasi Metropolis in Ghana. Many articles that support this theory also use the concept of peri-urbanization to support their findings. Lasisi et al. (2017) describes peri-urbanization as the conversion of strictly rural areas to more urbanized areas. This definition helps to understand the ongoing process that is occurring that contributes to the loss of agricultural land as a consequence of urbanization. 

The development of this theory allows for researchers to hone in their investigations of ongoing development trends to help bolster the literature on this development process. Using this theory as the established rule to this development trend streamlines the research in this area as researchers no longer have to search for a general rule that underlines this development process. This allows for researchers to examine the intricacies of this development trend and will make for a more comprehensive literature on the subject that will help to create solutions to combat food security in developing regions. 

## References

Abass, K., Adanu, S. K., & Agyemang, S. (2018). Peri-urbanisation and loss of arable land in Kumasi Metropolis in three decades: Evidence from remote sensing image analysis. Land Use Policy, 72, 470-479. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.01.013

Hatab, A. A., Cavinato, M. E., Lindemer, A., & Lagerkvist, C. (2019). Urban sprawl, food security and agricultural systems in developing countries: A systematic review of the literature. Cities, 94, 129-142. doi:10.1016/j.cities.2019.06.001

Lasisi, M., Popoola, A., Adediji, A., Adedeji, O., & Babalola, K. (n.d.). City Expansion and Agricultural Land Loss within the Peri-Urban Area of Osun State, Nigeria. Ghana Journal of Geography, 9(3), 132-163.

Sonnino, R. (2014). The new geography of food security: Exploring the potential of urban food strategies. The Geographical Journal, 182(2), 190-200. doi:10.1111/geoj.12129


